Distributions Gallery: Add Pareto (#563)
arviz-devs/preliz: docs/examples/gallery/pareto.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---
# Pareto Distribution

<audio controls> <source src="../../_static/pareto.mp3" type="audio/mpeg"> This browser cannot play the pronunciation audio file for this distribution. </audio>

> The Pareto distribution is a continuous probability distribution that was introduced by the Italian scientist Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923). It is a power-law probability distribution that is characterized by a heavy right tail. It is defined by two parameters: the scale parameter $m$ and the shape parameter $\alpha$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pareto distribution is a continuous probability distribution, known for following a power-law and having a heavy right tail. It is defined by two parameters: the scale parameter $m$ and the shape parameter $\alpha$.
```

It was originally used to describe the distribution of wealth in society where a small proportion of the population holds a large proportion of the wealth (the "80-20 rule"). It has since been used in various fields to describe a wide range of phenomena where events get rarer at greater magnitudes.

> In Bayesian modeling, it plays a key role in Pareto Smoothed Importance Sampling (PSIS) for stabilizing importance weights. PSIS is used in model evaluation methods like PSIS-LOO (Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation) where LOO applies a smoothing procedure that uses values from an estimated Pareto distribution to replace the largest importance weights, making LOO more robust. Moreover, the estimated $\hat{k}$ parameter of the Pareto distribution can be used as a  diagnostic tool to assess the reliability of the importance weights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think the text should be related to how distributions are used for priors and/or modeling, not how they are used for diagnostics or method used to "assist" Bayesian Modeling. But that's something we can discuss. 
The Pareto distribution used in PSIS is a generalized Pareto distribution with 3 parameters.
